American Crocodile

American crocodile

The American crocodile (Crocodylus acutus) is a species of crocodilian
found in the Neotropics. It is the most widespread of the four extant
species of crocodiles from the Americas. Populations occur from the
Atlantic and Pacific coasts of southern Mexico to South America as far as
Peru and Venezuela. It also lives on many of the Caribbean islands such as
Cuba, Jamaica, Hispaniola and Grand Cayman.

Within the United States, the American crocodile's distribution is limited
to Puerto Rico and the southern half of Florida, though at least two have
been found as far north as the Tampa Bay area. The current US population,
estimated at 2,000, represents a significant recovery from a few hundred in
the 1970s.

The habitat of the American crocodile consists largely of coastal areas.
It is also found in river systems, but has a tendency to prefer, not merely
to tolerate, some level of salinity, resulting in the species's
congregating in brackish lakes, mangrove swamps, lagoons, cays, and small
islands. Other crocodiles also have tolerance to salt water due to salt
glands underneath the tongue, but the American crocodile is the only
species other than the saltwater crocodile (C. porosus) to commonly live
and thrive in salt water. They can be found on beaches and small island
formations without any freshwater source, such as some of the many cays and
islets across the Bahamas and the Caribbean. They are also found in
hypersaline lakes; one of the largest known populations inhabits the Lago
Enriquillo.

The American is one of the larger crocodile species. Males can reach
lengths of 6.1 meters (20 feet), weighing up to 907 kilograms (2,000 pounds). On average,
mature males are more in the range of 4.1 meters (13 feet) to 4.8 meters (16 feet) in
length weighing about 400 kilograms (880 pounds). As with other crocodile species,
females are smaller; rarely exceeding 3.8 meters (12 feet) in length.

This species has a more V-shaped snout, compared to other large crocodiles,
which usually have a slightly wider snout. Adults have a uniform
grayish-green coloration with white or yellow undersides, while juveniles
have dark cross-banding on the tail and back. Despite their large size,
American crocodiles do not regularly attack large animals, as most large
crocodilians do. Fish, reptiles, birds and small mammals make up the
majority of their diet. On occasion, large mammals such as deer and cattle
are taken. Their dietary habits in coastal regions are not well studied.
Like any other large crocodilian, the American crocodile is potentially
dangerous to humans, but it is not a very aggressive species and attacks
are rare.

Taxonomy and etymology

Cuvier originally described the species as Crocodylus acutus in 1807. Over
time, it commonly became known as the "sharp-snout alligator". In 1822,
Constantine Samuel Rafinesque postulated that the species was in fact a
crocodile.

The species was redescribed as Crocodylus floridanus by William T. Hornaday
in 1875, when Hornaday and C.E. Jackson were sent from Washington, DC
to Florida to collect alligator hides. Upon hearing of a "big old gator" in
Arch Creek at the head of Biscayne Bay, Hornaday and his companions
searched for it and reported:

 "In a few hours we got sight of him, out on the bank in a saw-grass
 wallow. He was a monster for size—a perfect whale of a saurian, gray in
 color—and by all the powers, he was a genuine crocodile!"

Crocodylus floridanus is now considered an invalid junior synonym of C.
acutus. 

Characteristics

Like all crocodilians, the American crocodile is a quadruped, with four
short, stocky legs, a long, powerful tail and a scaly hide with rows of
ossified scutes running down its back and tail. Its snout is elongated
and includes a strong pair of jaws. Its eyes have nictitating membranes for
protection along with lachrymal glands, which produce tears.

The nostrils, eyes, and ears are situated on the top of its head, so the
rest of the body can be concealed underwater for surprise attacks.
Camouflage also helps it prey on food. The snout is relatively longer and
narrower than that of the American alligator (Alligator mississippiensis),
although broader on average than that of the Orinoco crocodile (C.
intermedius). American crocodiles are also paler and more grayish than the
relatively dark-hued alligator. This crocodile species normally crawls on
its belly, but it can also "high walk". Larger specimens can charge up to
nearly 10 miles per hour (16 kilometers per hour). They can swim at as much as 20 miles per hour (32 kilometers per hour) by
moving their bodies and tails in a sinuous fashion, but they cannot sustain
this speed.

The American crocodile is sometimes confused with the smaller, Central
American Morelet's crocodile, a smaller species that is native to Mexico.

Size

Newborn hatchlings are about 27 centimeters (10.6 inches) in length and about 60 grams (2.1
ounces) in mass. The average adult in the continental rivers can range
from 2.9 to 4 meters (9 feet 6 inches to 13 feet 1 inches) long and weigh up to 382 kilograms (842
pounds) in males, while females can range from 2.5 to 3 meters (8 feet 2 inches to 9 feet 10
inches) and weigh up to 173 kilograms (381 pounds), the lower total length representing
their average size at sexual maturity, the upper representing the expected
upper size limit for the respective sex in most known populations. 

In the Tárcoles River in Costa Rica, dozens of 4 meters (13 feet 1 inches) and a few 5
m (16 feet 5 inches) individuals frequent bridge crossings (where they are fed
daily, which may have helped them reach such consistently large sizes) and
are a popular tourist attraction. This species is said to grow largest in
the South American river basins, but rarely exceed 5 meters (16 feet 5 inches) or
reach 6 meters (19 feet 8 inches) even there. Crocodiles on the islands or coasts
are usually much smaller in size. Adult weight in coastal Belize averaged
77.8 kilograms (172 pounds) per one study. In their Florida range, adult length has
been recorded as high as 5.2 meters (17 feet 1 inches), but adult males on average
measure 3.35 meters (11 feet 0 inches) long, perhaps slightly smaller than mature
males from other continental populations. A skull of this species was
found to measure 72.6 centimeters (28.6 inches) and is estimated to have belonged to a
crocodile of 6.6 meters (22 feet) in length. Large, mature males regularly weigh
about 400–500 kilograms (880–1100 pounds), with the individuals of six or more meters
surpassing 1000 kilograms (2,200 pounds). Two biologists working with the History
Channel series MonsterQuest spotted and filmed a crocodile they estimated
to be 5 to 5.5 meters (16 feet 5 inches to 18 feet 1 inches), deep within Everglades
National Park in Florida.

Distribution and habitat

C. acutus is the most widespread of the four extant species of crocodiles
from the Americas. It inhabits waters such as mangrove swamps, river
mouths, fresh waters, and salt lakes, and can even be found at sea, hence
its wide distribution throughout the Caribbean islands, southern Florida,
the Greater Antilles, southern Mexico, Central America, and the South
American countries of Colombia and Ecuador. The American crocodile is
especially plentiful in Costa Rica. One of its largest documented
populations is in Lago Enriquillo, a hypersaline lake in the Dominican
Republic. The species has also been recorded from Jamaica. American
crocodiles have recently been sighted in Grand Cayman, leading experts to
believe the species may be swimming from Cuba (which is home to a massive
American crocodile population) and slowly repopulating Grand Cayman. In
addition, an American crocodile/Cuban crocodile hybrid was recently
discovered in the Cancun area. The crocodile likely originated in the
Zapata Swamp of Cuba (the only place where these wild hybrids exist) and
swam to the Yucatán Peninsula. Their saline tolerance also allowed the
American crocodile to colonize limited portions of the United States
(Puerto Rico and extreme southern Florida). Contrary to popular
misinformation, the presence of the American alligator is not the reason
the American crocodile was unable to populate brackish waters north of
Florida, but rather the climate.

American crocodiles, unlike American alligators, are extremely susceptible
to cold temperatures and live exclusively within tropical waters. During
2009, unusually cold weather in southern Florida resulted in the deaths of
about 150 wild American crocodiles, including a well-known crocodile which
inhabited Sanibel Island far north of their natural range. 

American crocodiles in the United States coexist with the American
alligator, and are primarily found south of the latitude of Miami, in
Everglades National Park, Florida Bay, Biscayne Bay, and the Florida
Keys. A sizable population occurs near Homestead, Florida, at the
Turkey Point Nuclear Generating Station.  Some individuals wander
northward to warm summer waters and have been sighted in Sarasota County
and Palm Beach County. In the summer of 2008, a crocodile was captured in
the surf on Isle of Palms, South Carolina. In 2013, a 700-pound crocodile
was captured in Tarpon Springs, Florida. Florida Fish & Wildlife
Conservation Commission program staff note that the crocodile was not
weighed to be 700 pounds. The weight was estimated by the Nuisance Alligator
Trapper who inadvertently caught the animal using a baited hook. American
crocodiles of similar lengths have been accurately weighed at 450-500 pounds.

The American crocodile is saltwater-tolerant and have thus been capable of
colonizing a multitude of islands within the Caribbean islands and on some
coastal Pacific islands as well. They coexist with the rather smaller
spectacled caiman within Central America. The only other crocodiles present
within the American crocodile's range are two species smaller than this
species on average: the critically endangered Cuban crocodile, along with
the Morelet's crocodile in southern Mexico and Guatemala.

Biology and behavior

American crocodiles are more susceptible to cold than American
alligators. While an American alligator can survive in water of 7.2 °C
(45.0 °F) for some time, an American crocodile in that environment would
become helpless and drown. American crocodiles, however, have a faster
growth rate than alligators, and are much more tolerant of salt water.

Cleaning symbiosis involving the American crocodile as client has been
described. Unlike the Old World crocodiles, which are sometimes cleared of
parasites by birds, the American crocodile relies more on fish for parasite
removal.

Hunting and diet

American crocodiles are apex predators, and any aquatic or terrestrial
animal they encounter in freshwater, riparian and coastal saltwater
habitats is potential prey. For a long time, primary prey throughout their
lifetime was thought to be fish; due to the relatively narrow snout as
indicative of this piscivorous preference. However new studies shed light
into the dietary preference of this species. The snout of the American
crocodile is broader than some specialized fish-eating crocodilians (i.e.
gharials (Gavialis gangeticus), freshwater crocodile (C. johnsoni), etc.),
allowing it to supplement its diet with a wider variety of prey. In
addition the snout gets even broader and bulkier as the animal matures, a
sign for a shift in prey items. Prey species have ranged in size from the
insects taken by young crocodiles to full-grown cattle taken by large
adults, and can include various birds, mammals, turtles, crabs, snails,
frogs, and occasionally carrion. In Haiti, hatchling and juvenile
crocodiles lived primarily off of fiddler crabs (Uca ssp.), making up 33.8%
and 62.3% of the diet by weight, respectively. Elsewhere, aquatic insects
and their larvae and snails are near the top of the food list for
crocodiles at this very early age. Immature and subadult crocodiles, per a
study in Mexico, have a more diverse diet that can include insects, fish,
frogs, small turtles, birds and small mammals. One specimen of 1.2 meters (3 feet
11 inches) had a catfish, a mourning dove (Zenaida macroura) and a bare-tailed
woolly opossum (Caluromys philander) in its stomach. In Florida, bass,
tarpon (Megalops atlanticus) and especially mullet, large crabs, snakes,
mammals that habit the riparian and coastal regions of the Everglades, such
as opossums and raccoons appeared to be the primary prey of subadult and
adult American crocodiles. In Haiti, adults appeared to live largely off
of various birds (many of which are breeding large waders and other water
birds such as heron, storks, flamingos (Phoenicopterus ruber), pelicans
(Pelecanus ssp.), grebes, coots (Fulica americana) and moorhens (Gallinula
chloropus)), followed by concentrations of marine fish including Tilapia
and Cichlasoma, at times being seen to capture turtles, dogs and goats.
One 3 meters (9 feet 10 inches) adult from Honduras had stomach contents consisting of
a 1.5 meters (4 feet 11 inches) crocodile of its own species, a turtle shell and
peccary hooves. It was noted that historically in Mexico that, among
several local farmers, the capturing of livestock by crocodiles has been a
source of some conflict between humans and crocodiles and large adults
occasionally can become habitual predators of goats, dogs, pigs and
cattle. In Quintana Roo, Mexico, most prey that could be determined was
fish for sub-adults and adults with sub-adults having a broader prey base
than either younger or adult crocodiles. In Costa Rica, American
crocodiles have been recorded hunting and killing adult female olive ridley
sea turtles (Lepidochelys olivacea) when they come to nest around
beaches. Reportedly, these crocodiles hunt primarily in the first few
hours after nightfall, especially on moonless nights, although they will
feed at any time. It hunts in the typical way for most crocodilian,
ambushing terrestrial prey when it comes to edge of the water or is sitting
in shallows and dragging it down to be drowned or attempting to ambush
aquatic prey from near the surface of the water.

Interspecies predatory relations

Adult American crocodiles have no natural predators and almost any
terrestrial or riparian animal they encounter is potential prey. American
crocodiles are known predators of lemon sharks, and sharks avoid areas with
crocodiles. Usually American crocodiles are dominant over alligators.
However on one occasion, an American crocodile, in a Florida zoo escaped
its cage and started a fight with a large male American alligator in a
bordering pen and was killed by the alligator. Conversely, there is one
confirmed case of a crocodile preying on a sub-adult alligator in the wild
in Florida. Alligators and crocodiles do not often come into conflict in
the wild normally, due largely to habitat partitioning and largely separate
distributions. There are several records of American crocodiles killing
and eating spectacled caimans (Caiman crocodilus) in South America as well
as additional records of cannibalism there. Areas with healthy American
crocodile populations remain often find limited numbers of spectacled
caimans, while conversely areas that formerly held crocodiles but where
they are now heavily depleted or are locally extinct show a growth of
caiman numbers, due to less competition as well as predation. In areas
where the two species coexist, smaller but more aggressive Cuban crocodile
is behaviorally dominant over the larger American crocodile. In Mexico
some Morelet's crocodiles individuals have escaped from captivity, make
feral populations and creating a problem for the populations of American
crocodile, which must compete with this invasive species.

Reproduction

American crocodiles breed in late fall or early winter, engaging in
drawn-out mating ceremonies in which males emit very low frequency bellows
to attract females. Body size is more important than age in determining
reproductive capabilities, and females reach sexual maturity at a length of
about 2.8 meters (9.2 feet). In February or March, gravid females will begin to
create nests of sand, mud, and dead vegetation along the water's edge. Nest
location is crucial, and with the correct amount of vegetation, the eggs
will develop within a small temperature range. Because sex determination is
temperature-dependent in crocodilians, slight aberrations in temperature
may result in all-male or all-female clutches, which would possibly harm
the health of the population. About one month later, when it is time to
lay, the female will dig a wide hole diagonally into the side of the nest
and lay 30 to 70 eggs in it, depending on her size. After laying, the
female may cover the eggs with debris or leave them uncovered. The white,
elongated eggs are 8 centimeters (3.1 inches) long and 5 centimeters (2.0 inches) wide and have a
number of pores in the brittle shell. During the 75- to 80-day incubation
period, the parents will guard the nest, often inhabiting a hole in the
bank nearby. Females especially have been known to guard their nests with
ferocity. But in spite of these precautions, crocodile eggs sometimes fall
prey to raccoons (Procyon sp.) (arguably the most virulent natural predator
of crocodilian nests in the Americas), coatis, foxes, skunks or other
scavenging mammals (even coyotes (Canis latrans) in Mexico and American
black bears (Ursus americanus)) in south Florida), as well as large
predatory ants, crabs and vultures. In Panama, green iguana (Iguana
iguana) were seen to dig up and prey on American crocodile eggs
occasionally, although in several cases were caught by the mother crocodile
and subsequently consumed. Crocodilian eggs are somewhat brittle, but
softer than bird eggs. Young of this species hatch after 75–80 days.

This species exists mostly in tropical areas with distinct rainy seasons,
and the young hatch near the time of the first rains of the summer
(July–August), after the preceding dry season and before the bodies of
water where they live flood. In this stage of development of their young,
mother crocodiles exhibit a unique mode of parental care. During the
hatching process, when the young crocodiles are most vulnerable to
predation, they will instinctively call out in soft, grunt-like croaks.
These sounds trigger the female to attend to the nest, uncovering the eggs
if they have been covered. Then she will aid the hatchlings in escaping
their eggs and scoop them up with her mouth, carrying them to the closest
water source.

The hatchlings, which are 24 to 27 centimeters (9.4 to 10.6 inches) in length, have been
reported to actively hunt prey within a few days of hatching. It is not
uncommon for the mother to care for her young even weeks after they have
hatched, remaining attentive to their calls and continuing to provide
transportation. About five weeks after hatching, the young crocodiles
disband in search of their own independent lives. Most of them, of course,
will not survive, being preyed upon by several types of raptorial birds and
larger fishes (e.g. barred catfish (Pseudoplatystoma fasciatum), Atlantic
tarpons (Megalops atlanticus), common snook (Centropomis undecimalis) and
lemon sharks (Negaprion brevirostris)), boa constrictors (Boa constrictor),
black spiny-tailed iguana (Ctenosaura similis), spectacled caimans, as well
as raccoons. Those that do survive the early stages of life will grow
rapidly, feeding on insects, fish and frogs. Additionally, some young
crocodiles reportedly will feed on each other.

Conservation status

Due to hide hunting, pollution, loss of habitat, and removal of adults for
commercial farming, the American crocodile is endangered in parts of its
range. In 1972, Venezuela banned commercial crocodile skin harvesting for
a decade, as a result of 1950s and 1960s overhunting.

1,000-2,000 American crocodiles live in Mexico and Central and South
America, but populations are data deficient. The American crocodile is
considered a vulnerable species, but has not been assessed since 1996. It
has an estimated wild population of 500 to 1,200 in southern Florida. On
March 20, 2007, the United States Fish and Wildlife Service declassified
the American crocodile as an endangered species, downgrading its status to
"threatened"; the reptile remains protected from illegal harassing,
poaching, or killing under the federal Endangered Species Act. In
southern Florida, 67.8% of crocodile mortality was attributed most likely
to road collisions (found dead by the road), 10.5% were due to intentional
killing and only 4.9% could be contributed to natural causes (the remaining
balance were causes unknown).

Relationship with humans

American crocodiles are dangerous to humans; attacks in Mexico, Costa Rica,
and Panama are not unprecedented. These attacks rarely make international
news, so this species is not as well-documented as a man-eater, as are its
relatives. The species is often reportedly timid, and seemingly lacks the
propensity to attack people as regularly as Old World crocodiles do.
Crocodiles are, as a general rule are more aggressive than alligators. The
American crocodile rates, temperamentally somewhere in the middle of all
crocodilians . A study by the IUCN found that the American crocodile has
the highest incidence of reported attacks on humans, but fatalities were
rare <Sideleau & Britton>. The estimated number of attacks is considerably
smaller than those by the saltwater and Nile crocodiles (C. niloticus). The
saltwater and Nile crocodiles are considered to be the most aggressive and
dangerous species towards humans. Reportedly, the Cuban crocodile (C.
rhombifer) is rather more aggressive in interspecies interactions than the
American crocodile and apparently attacks and displaces American crocodiles
when they are kept in mixed species enclosures at zoos or at crocodile
farms together, even though it is smaller than the American species.
However, attacks are rarely reportedly in Cuban crocodiles, undoubtedly due
its much more limited habitat and range. In May 2007, two instances
occurred within one week of children being attacked and killed by this
species—one in Mexico just south of Puerto Vallarta and one in Costa
Rica. On August 24, 2014, a man and a woman were swimming in a canal
in Gables by the Sea, a community in Coral Gables, Florida, at 2:00 AM, in
a canal where crocodiles were known to occur, when they were bitten in the
shoulder and the hand by an American crocodile. Although the crocodile was
12' 1" in length, and weighed an estimated 550 pounds, it did not press the
attack, but released. and moved away from its victims. (Florida Fish &
Wildlife Conservation Commission, Crocodile Response Program) This was the
first documented wild crocodile attack on humans in Florida since records
of human-crocodile conflict have been kept. On May 19, 2015, a
seven-year-old boy was attacked and killed by an American Crocodile in the
Barra Santa Ana estuary near the city of Lazaro Cardenas, Mexico. This
was reportedly the eighth crocodile attack in the Barra Santa Ana estuary
in the last two years.
