Morelet's Crocodile

Morelet's crocodile

Morelet's crocodile (Crocodylus moreletii), also known as the Mexican
crocodile, is a modest sized crocodilian found only in fresh waters of the
Atlantic regions of Mexico, Belize and Guatemala. It usually grows to
about 3 metres (9.8 feet) in length. It is a Least Concern species.

Taxonomy and etymology

Morelet's crocodile was discovered in Mexico in 1850 and named after the
French naturalist who made the discovery, Pierre Marie Arthur Morelet
(1809–1892). It was long confused with the American and Cuban crocodiles
because of similar characteristics and an ambiguous type locality. It was
not generally accepted as a separate species until the 1920s.

Characteristics

Morelet's crocodile has a very broad snout with 66 to 68 teeth when they
are fully mature. They are dark grayish-brown in color with dark bands and
spots on the body and the tail. This is similar to other crocodiles, like
the American crocodile, but the Morelet is somewhat darker. Juvenile
crocodiles are bright yellow with some dark bands. The crocodile's iris is
silvery brown. They have four short legs, giving them a rather sprawling
gait, and a long tail, which is used for swimming. The hind feet of the
crocodiles are webbed. They have very explosive capabilities because of
their strong muscles and are fast runners.

Size

Morelet's crocodile is small compared to most other crocodiles. The males
can become larger than the females. The average adult Morelet's crocodile
is about 2.1 meters (6.9 feet), with a typical length range of 1.5 to 2.7 meters (4.9
to 8.9 feet) (the lower measurement representing the mean total length of a
female at sexual maturity which is attained at roughly 7–8 years of age in
the wild). Almost all crocodiles in excess of 2.5 meters (8.2 feet) are males
and at this advanced stage of maturity, the male goes through a significant
change in skull osteological morphology as the skull appears to increase in
broadness and robustness. Large adult males can attain a length of 3 m
(9.8 feet), anything in excess of this is considered exceptionally rare for
this species however the species has a maximum reported length of 4.5 meters (15
feet), with two other outsized specimens reportedly measuring 4.1 and 4.3 m
(13 and 14 feet), respectively.  Body mass in this species is often
around 38–58 kilograms (84–128 pounds), however this may include possibly overweight
captive specimen and average adult body mass in wild adults from Belize was
posited as approximately 27.7 kilograms (61 pounds). The weight of a large 3 meters (9.8
feet) wild male crocodile is estimated to average 83.9 kilograms (185 pounds) in
although mass is likely much more in outsized individuals. Overall,
this species is similar in appearance and morphology to the Cuban and the
larger American crocodiles in appearance.

Distribution and habitat

Morelet's crocodile can be found in freshwater habitats in Central America
and along the Gulf of Mexico stretching through Belize, Guatemala, and to
Mexico. The Belizean pine forests are an example of the type of
ecoregion in which they occur. In their freshwater habitats, they prefer
isolated areas that are secluded. This species of crocodile can mainly be
found in freshwater swamps and marshes, which are located inland, and in
large rivers and lakes. Both of these habitats are forested to help add
cover.

The Morelet can also be found along the coast in brackish waters and the
grassy savannas on the Yucatán Peninsula. These crocodiles become much
more distributed during the rainy seasons when flooding occurs and it is
easier for them to move elsewhere.

Juvenile crocodiles live in very dense cover to protect them from other
predators that might be in the area and will remain there until they become
older and able to fend for themselves. Adult crocodiles are known to dig
out burrows during dry seasons in their area. The range of this crocodile
can overlap with the American crocodile, which can sometimes lead to them
being confused with one another.

Recently, the Morelet's crocodile has been introduced into the Rio Grande
(Rio Bravo in Mexico). Several newspaper outlets on the Mexican side of
the border report of reptiles inhabiting the river appearing not to be the
American alligator which is native to Texas, but the Morelet's crocodile
which is native to Tamaulipas from San Fernando southward. Making a new
danger for people who swim or illegally cross into the United States. 
Crocodiles have been seen in the cities of Matamoros,  Reynosa 
  and as far north as Nuevo Laredo. The sightings have
prompted several municipal police departments to put up signs warning
people about entering the river.

Biology and behavior

Hunting and diet

Like most crocodilians, Morelet's crocodiles are highly opportunistic and
will prey on practically anything that they can overpower that comes in
their territories. Juvenile crocodiles feed largely on fish and insects
until they become bigger and more capable of bringing down larger prey.
Adults largely prey on small mammals, birds, and other reptiles as well as
gastropods, crustaceans and other invertebrates. These small mammals
can include domesticated animals like cats and dogs. Large specimens have
been shown to be able to overtake large prey. Dogs and goats have been
taken by this species, including a record of a 2.9 meters (9.5 feet) adult killing
an English sheepdog which weighed at least 35 kilograms (77 pounds). Adults have
also been recorded eating even larger animals, including adult and
nearly-grown cattle and an adult tapir, although these have been cases of
scavenging on caracasses, with the tapir having been killed by a jaguar (it
is possible that jaguar was present when the crocodile fed). Crocodiles
have been known to be cannibalistic towards smaller specimens. Although
previously thought to be inoffensive, there have been recent reports that
the species has attacked humans on multiple occasions and at least four
documented human fatalities have occurred. Despite the relatively small
size of the species, large adult Morelet's are aggressive and easily
capable of overpowering an unaware human near the water. Due to partial
consumption, recorded fatal attacks are likely predatory rather than
defensive in nature. 

Reproduction

Breeding usually takes place between April and June and the eggs or laid
before the start of the rainy season. Morelet's crocodiles are unique
among North American crocodiles in that they build mound nests only, and
not mound and hole nests. These mound nests are about 3 meters (9.8 feet) wide
and 1 meters (3.3 feet) high and can be found near the water or on floating
vegetation. A female crocodile can lay between 20 and 45 eggs and nests
have been found containing eggs from more than one female. The eggs are
buried and the nests are guarded by females. The eggs usually hatch after
80 days of incubation and hatchlings are normally about 17 centimeters (6.7 inches)
long. After the eggs have hatched the female crocodile will carry her
young to the water where they are protected by both parents and will later
leave them to fend for themselves. Females are highly protective of their
young and have reportedly been observed to aggressively displace intruders
and humans if distress calls of the baby crocodiles are heard and even
father crocodiles have been observed to spring to the defense of young
crocodiles. In captivity, juvenile crocodiles are treated aggressively
by adult crocodiles but never hatchlings.

Conservation

Morelet's crocodile has long been threatened by habitat destruction and
illegal hunting. Both of these factors have significantly lowered their
populations. It was hunted for its hide during the 1940s and 1950s
because high quality leather can be made from their skins. Crocodile
leather can be used to make wallets, coats and shoes.

One of the key protectors of crocodiles today is the CSG, or Crocodile
Specialist Group, started in 1971. This is a worldwide organization of
biologist and other professions coming together to conserve the 23 species
of alligators and crocodiles. The CSG monitors all trading of crocodile
skins and helps determine if the skins are legal or were illegally taken.
When this organization started, all of the crocodilian species were either
threatened or endangered. Today, those numbers have greatly changed.

"By 1996 one third of the crocodilian species were abundant enough to
support regulated annual harvests, another third were no longer in danger
of extinction, but the final one third of the species still remain
endangered."
