New Guinea Crocodile

New Guinea crocodile

The New Guinea crocodile (Crocodylus novaeguineae) is a small species of
crocodile found on the island of New Guinea where there are two
geographically isolated populations to the north and south of the mountain
ridge that runs along the centre of the island. In the past it included the
Philippine crocodile, C. n. mindorensis, as a subspecies, but today they
are regarded as separate species. The habitat of the New Guinea crocodile
is mostly freshwater swamps and lakes. It is most active at night when it
feeds on fish and a range of other small animals. A female crocodile lays a
clutch of eggs in a nest composed of vegetation and she lies up nearby to
guard the nest. There is some degree of parental care for newly hatched
juveniles. This crocodile was over-hunted for its valuable skin in the mid
20th century, but conservation measures have since been put in place, it is
reared in ranches and the International Union for Conservation of Nature
(IUCN) lists it as being of "Least Concern".

Taxonomy and etymology

The New Guinea crocodile was first described by the American herpetologist
Karl Patterson Schmidt in 1928 as Crocodylus novaeguineae. At one time it
was thought that there were two subspecies, C. n. novaeguineae, the New
Guinea crocodile native to Papua New Guinea and Western New Guinea, and C.
n. mindorensis, the Philippine crocodile, native to several islands
including Busuanga, Luzon, Masbate, Mindoro, Negros, Samar and Mindanao.
Most authorities now consider that the Philippine crocodile is an entirely
separate species. In fact DNA sequencing data reported in 2011 has shown
that the Philippine crocodile is paraphyletic with regard to the New Guinea
crocodile, and that the latter constitutes a population within the
Philippine crocodile.

The genus name Crocodylus comes from the Greek kroko which means a pebble
and deilos, a worm or man, referring to the knobbly appearance of the
dorsal surface of the reptile. The specific epithet novaeguineae is from
the Latin and means "of New Guinea". Other common names for this crocodile
include New Guinea freshwater crocodile, Singapore large grain, Puk Puk,
Buaya air tawar and Wahne huala.

Phylogeny

The cladogram below follows the topology from a 2011 analysis of
mitochondrial DNA sequences by Robert W. Meredith, Evon R. Hekkala, George
Amato and John Gatesy.

Characteristics

The New Guinea crocodile grows to a length of up to 3.5 meters (11 feet) for males
and 2.7 meters (8.9 feet) for females, although most specimens are smaller. The
body ranges from grey to brown in colour, with darker bandings on the tail
and body which become less noticeable as the animal grows. Longitudinal
ridges in front of the eyes and some granular scales on the back of the
neck between four large scales are distinctive features of this species.
There are some differences between the northerly and southerly populations
in the morphology of the skull and the arrangement of the scales. The
snout is pointed and relatively narrow during juvenile stages and becomes
wider as the animal matures. The New Guinea crocodile bears a physical
similarity to the nearby Philippine crocodile (C. mindorensis) and Siamese
crocodile (C. siamensis). The colouring is similar to that of the
freshwater crocodile (Crocodylus johnsoni) of northern Australia, but the
snout is somewhat shorter and broader. 

Distribution and habitat

This crocodile is to be found in the freshwater swamps, marshes and lakes
of New Guinea, particularly in the interior. It has been known to enter
brackish waters such as those of the Fly River estuary but is very rare in
coastal areas, and never found in the presence of the competing saltwater
crocodile (C. porosus). The animal was first described from the Sepik
River area in the north of Papua New Guinea. A separate population is found
in the southern half of the island, with a range that extends from
southeastern Papua New Guinea to the Indonesian provinces of Papua and West
Papua. It is separated from the northern population by the mountain range
that runs along the centre of the island. DNA analysis has revealed
these to be genetically separate populations. There are estimated to be
between 50,000 and 100,000 New Guinea crocodiles in the wild.

Behaviour

New Guinea crocodiles have a mostly aquatic lifestyle and are largely
nocturnal. They spend much of the day underwater, often with their nostrils
and eyes above the surface. Powerful side-to-side movements of their tails
propel them through the water and they use both tail and legs to steer.
When on land, they favour shady, dense areas of undergrowth. They tend to
bask in a group during the day, dispersing at night to feed.

Females become sexually mature when about 1.6 to 2 metres (5 feet 3 inches to 6
feet 7 inches) long and males at about 2.5 metres (8 feet 2 inches). Eggs are laid
about 14 days after mating. In the northern population, breeding takes
place during the dry season between August and October. A floating nest
composed of vegetation is made in a shallow water location such as in an
overgrown channel, at the edge of a lake, on a scroll swale or beside a
stream. A clutch of between 22 and 45 eggs is laid and covered with further
vegetation. In the southern population, the wet season is chosen for
reproduction. The nest is sometimes built in a similar locations to the
northern nests, but is more often on land, and a smaller number of rather
larger eggs is laid. In both populations, the mother stays near the nest
during the incubation period, which lasts about 80 days. When the eggs
start to hatch, the emerging young are quite vocal, and both male and
female crocodiles have been observed transporting hatching and newly
hatched young to open water, carrying them delicately in their mouths. 

Newly hatched New Guinea crocodiles feed on aquatic insects, spiders,
tadpoles, freshwater snails, frogs, fish and small mammals. As they grow,
so does the size of their prey and their consumption of fish rises, but
they still will eat anything of a worthwhile size that they can find. An
adult's diet is largely fish, caught by sweeping the snout sideways and
snapping at the prey, but also includes shrimps, crabs, frogs, snakes,
birds and medium-sized mammals. A crocodile catches its prey by stealth
with a flick of its head, impaling it with its sharp teeth and gripping and
crushing it. The jaws cannot move sideways to chew the food; instead, the
crocodile's head is tossed to move the prey to the back of the mouth before
the prey is swallowed whole. This crocodile is surprisingly agile and can
lunge its body upward into the air to catch bats, flying birds, and leaping
fish. It can also probe into the mud at the bottom of river or swamp with
its snout to search for crabs and molluscs.

Adult and young New Guinea crocodiles have a range of vocalisations. An
adult female can produce a repeated throaty "roar" when approached by
another adult. The young start communicating with each other while still in
the egg; this may help synchronise hatching. Newly hatched juveniles use
various yelps and grunts. When startled, a warning sound emitted by one
will send all the juveniles diving to the bottom of the water. Adults in
the vicinity respond with growls, threats, and attacks. The distress
noises of a youngster when handled at a ranching facility was observed to
cause all the larger animals to become involved in frenzied activity, with
some rushing towards the juvenile and others thrashing about in the water
and slapping their heads down on the surface.

Status and conservation

The IUCN listed this crocodile as being "Vulnerable" in its Red List of
Threatened Species in 1986 and 1988, but changed the assessment to "Least
Concern" in 1996. At the time it was stated that the animal has a large
area of suitable habitat and seemed to be plentiful. Its status has not
been reassessed since then. It is included in Appendix II of the Convention
on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora
(CITES).

The skin of the New Guinea crocodile is valuable and in the 1950s and 1960s
the animals in the northern population were heavily hunted to a point where
they might have become extinct. Around 1970, legislation was put in place
and they received some protection. In the period 1977 to 1980, the harvest
of wild skins was over 20,000 per year but in the 1980s this declined to
12,000 to 20,000. As well as this, some 2,500 to 10,000 eggs and hatchlings
were collected annually to raise on ranches. However, in 1995, the largest
ranch on the island initiated a change of strategy to concentrate on
raising the saltwater crocodile, and demand for the eggs and juveniles of
the New Guinea crocodile dried up. Since then, cropping of wild animals has
been controlled in both Indonesia and Papua New Guinea. In the former it is
limited to a belly width of 25 to 51 centimeters (10 to 20 inches) for wet skins and in
the latter to salted skins with a belly width of 18 to 51 centimeters (7 to 20 inches).
Some eggs and hatchlings are still removed from the nest and raised in
enclosures and a similar programme has more recently been initiated for
southern populations.
