West African Crocodile

West African crocodile

The West African crocodile or desert crocodile (Crocodylus suchus) is a
species of crocodile related to – and often confused with – the Nile
crocodile (C. niloticus).

Taxonomy

The species was named by Étienne Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire in 1807, who
discovered differences between the skulls of a mummified crocodile and
those of C. niloticus. This new species was, however, for a long time
afterwards regarded as a synonym of the Nile crocodile, but a 2011 study
showed that all sampled mummified crocodiles from Egypt belonged to a
different species than C. niloticus, and thereby resurrected the name C.
suchus.

Distribution

The West African crocodile inhabits Mauritania, Benin, Nigeria, Niger,
Cameroon, Chad, Central African Republic, Equatorial Guinea, Senegal, Mali,
Guinea, Gambia, Burkina Faso, Ghana, Gabon, Togo, Ivory Coast, Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Republic of Congo and Uganda (Uganda has both Nile
and West African crocodiles). One C. suchus specimen also exists at the St.
Augustine Alligator Farm Zoological Park, and pairs live in Copenhagen Zoo
and Dublin Zoo.

West African crocodiles in Mauritania have adapted to their arid
environment by staying in caves or burrows in a state of æstivation during
the driest periods. When it rains, the reptiles gather at gueltas.

Relationship with humans

The people of Ancient Egypt worshiped Sobek, a crocodile-god associated
with fertility, protection, and the power of the pharaoh. They had an
ambivalent relationship with Sobek, as they did (and do) with C. suchus;
sometimes they hunted crocodiles and reviled Sobek, and sometimes they saw
him as a protector and source of pharaonic power. C. suchus was known to be
more docile than the Nile crocodile and was chosen by the Ancient Egyptians
for spiritual rites, including mummification. A recent DNA test found that
all sampled mummified crocodiles from Grottes de Thebes, Grottes de Samoun,
and Haute Egypt belonged to this species.

Sobek was depicted as a crocodile, as a mummified crocodile, or as a man
with the head of a crocodile. The center of his worship was in the Middle
Kingdom city of Arsinoe in the Faiyum Oasis (now Al Fayyum), known as
"Crocodilopolis" by the Greeks. Another major temple to Sobek is in
Kom-Ombo; other temples were scattered across the country.

Historically, C. suchus inhabited the Nile River in Lower Egypt along with
the Nile crocodile. Herodotus wrote that the Ancient Egyptian priests were
selective when picking crocodiles. Priests were aware of the difference
between the two species, C. suchus being smaller and more docile, making it
easier to catch and tame. Herodotus also indicated that some Egyptians
kept crocodiles as pampered pets. In Sobek's temple in Arsinoe, a crocodile
was kept in the pool of the temple, where it was fed, covered with jewelry,
and worshipped. When the crocodiles died, they were embalmed, mummified,
placed in sarcophagi, and then buried in a sacred tomb. Many mummified C.
suchus specimens and even crocodile eggs have been found in Egyptian tombs.

Spells were used to appease crocodiles in Ancient Egypt, and even in modern
times Nubian fishermen stuff and mount crocodiles over their doorsteps to
ward against evil.

In modern times, Mauritanian traditional peoples who live in close
proximity to West African crocodiles revere them and protect them from
harm. This is due to their belief that, just as water is essential to
crocodiles, so crocodiles are essential to the water, which would
permanently disappear if they were not there to inhabit it. The crocodiles
live in harmony with the humans, and never attack swimmers. 

Conservation

As late as the 1920s, museums continued to obtain C. suchus specimens from
the Nile in Sudan.
